The PDF::Reader library implements a PDF parser conforming as much as possible
to the PDF specification from Adobe.

It provides programmatic access to the contents of a PDF file with a high
degree of flexibility.

The PDF 1.7 specification is a weighty document and not all aspects are
currently supported. I welcome submission of PDF files that exhibit
unsupported aspects of the spec to assist with improving out support.

= Development Status

I adopted this library in 2007 when I was learning the fundamentals of the PDF
spec. I do not currently use it in my day to day work and I just don't have the
spare time to dedicate to adding new features.

The code as it is works fairly well, and I offer it "as is". All patches, bug
reports and sample PDFs are welcome - I will work on them when I can. If anyone
is interested in adding features to PDF::Reader in their own effort to learn
the PDF file format, I'll happy offer help qand support.

I STRONGLY RECOMMEND NOT USING PDF::READER FOR YOUR PRODUCTION CODE.

= Installation

The recommended installation method is via Rubygems.

  gem install pdf-reader

= Usage

PDF::Reader is designed with a callback-style architecture. The basic concept
is to build a receiver class and pass that into PDF::Reader along with the PDF
to process.

As PDF::Reader walks the file and encounters various objects (pages, text,
images, shapes, etc) it will call methods on the receiver class.  What those
methods do is entirely up to you - save the text, extract images, count pages,
read metadata, whatever.

For a full list of the supported callback methods and a description of when they
will be called, refer to PDF::Reader::Content. See the code examples below for a
way to print a list of all the callbacks generated by a file to STDOUT.

= Text Encoding

Internally, text can be stored inside a PDF in various encodings, including
zingbats, win-1252, mac roman and a form of Unicode. To avoid confusion, all
text will be converted to UTF-8 before it is passed back from PDF::Reader.

= Exceptions

There are two key exceptions that you will need to watch out for when processing a
PDF file:

MalformedPDFError - The PDF appears to be corrupt in some way. If you believe the
file should be valid, or that a corrupt file didn't raise an exception, please
forward a copy of the file to the maintainers (preferably via the google group)
and we can attempt to improve the code.

UnsupportedFeatureError - The PDF uses a feature that PDF::Reader doesn't currently
support. Again, we welcome submissions of PDF files that exhibit these features to help
us with future code improvements.

MalformedPDFError has some subclasses if you want to detect finer grained issues. If you
don't, 'rescue MalformedPDFError' will catch all the subclassed errors as well.

Any other exceptions should be considered bugs in either PDF::Reader (please
report it!) or your receiver (please don't report it!).

= Maintainers

- James Healy <mailto:jimmy@deefa.com>

= Mailing List

Any questions or feedback should be sent to the PDF::Reader google group. It's
better that any answers be available for others instead of hiding in someone's
inbox.

http://groups.google.com/group/pdf-reader

= Examples

The easiest way to explain how this works in practice is to show some examples.

== Naïve Page Counter

A simple app to count the number of pages in a PDF File.

  require 'rubygems'
  require 'pdf/reader'

  class PageReceiver
    attr_accessor :counter

    def initialize
      @counter = 0
    end

    # Called when page parsing ends
    def end_page
      @counter += 1
    end
  end

  receiver = PageReceiver.new
  pdf = PDF::Reader.file("somefile.pdf", receiver)
  puts "#{receiver.counter} pages"

== List all callbacks generated by a single PDF

WARNING: this will generate a *lot* of output, so you probably want to pipe
it through less or to a text file.

  require 'rubygems'
  require 'pdf/reader'

  receiver = PDF::Reader::RegisterReceiver.new
  pdf = PDF::Reader.file("somefile.pdf", receiver)
  receiver.callbacks.each do |cb|
    puts cb
  end

== Extract all text from a single PDF

  class PageTextReceiver
    attr_accessor :content

    def initialize
      @content = []
    end

    # Called when page parsing starts
    def begin_page(arg = nil)
      @content << ""
    end

    # record text that is drawn on the page
    def show_text(string, *params)
      @content.last << string.strip
    end

    # there's a few text callbacks, so make sure we process them all
    alias :super_show_text :show_text
    alias :move_to_next_line_and_show_text :show_text
    alias :set_spacing_next_line_show_text :show_text

    # this final text callback takes slightly different arguments
    def show_text_with_positioning(*params)
      params = params.first
      params.each { |str| show_text(str) if str.kind_of?(String)}
    end
  end

  receiver = PageTextReceiver.new
  pdf = PDF::Reader.file("somefile.pdf", receiver)
  puts receiver.content.inspect

== Extract metadata only

  require 'rubygems'
  require 'pdf/reader'

  class MetaDataReceiver
    attr_accessor :regular
    attr_accessor :xml

    def metadata(data)
      @regular = data
    end

    def metadata_xml(data)
      @xml = data
    end
  end

  receiver = MetaDataReceiver.new
  pdf = PDF::Reader.file(ARGV.shift, receiver, :pages => false, :metadata => true)
  puts receiver.regular.inspect
  puts receiver.xml.inspect

== Improved Page Counter

A simple app to display the number of pages in a PDF File.

  require 'rubygems'
  require 'pdf/reader'

  class PageReceiver
    attr_accessor :pages

    # Called when page parsing ends
    def page_count(arg)
      @pages = arg
    end
  end

  receiver = PageReceiver.new
  pdf = PDF::Reader.file("somefile.pdf", receiver, :pages => false)
  puts "#{receiver.pages} pages"

== Basic RSpec of a generated PDF

  require 'rubygems'
  require 'pdf/reader'
  require 'pdf/writer'
  require 'spec'

  class PageTextReceiver
    attr_accessor :content

    def initialize
      @content = []
    end

    # Called when page parsing starts
    def begin_page(arg = nil)
      @content << ""
    end

    def show_text(string, *params)
      @content.last << string.strip
    end

    # there's a few text callbacks, so make sure we process them all
    alias :super_show_text :show_text
    alias :move_to_next_line_and_show_text :show_text
    alias :set_spacing_next_line_show_text :show_text

    def show_text_with_positioning(*params)
      params = params.first
      params.each { |str| show_text(str) if str.kind_of?(String)}
    end
  end

  context "My generated PDF" do
    specify "should have the correct text on 2 pages" do

      # generate our PDF
      pdf = PDF::Writer.new
      pdf.text "Chunky", :font_size => 32, :justification => :center
      pdf.start_new_page
      pdf.text "Bacon", :font_size => 32, :justification => :center
      pdf.save_as("chunkybacon.pdf")

      # process the PDF
      receiver = PageTextReceiver.new
      PDF::Reader.file("chunkybacon.pdf", receiver)

      # confirm the text appears on the correct pages
      receiver.content.size.should eql(2)
      receiver.content[0].should eql("Chunky")
      receiver.content[1].should eql("Bacon")
    end
  end

= Known Limitations

The order of the callbacks is unpredictable, and is dependent on the internal
layout of the file, not the order objects are displayed to the user. As a
consequence of this it is highly unlikely that text will be completely in
order.

Occasionally some text cannot be extracted properly due to the way it has been
stored, or the use of invalid bytes. In these cases PDF::Reader will output a
little UTF-8 friendly box to indicate an unrecognisable character.

= Resources

- PDF::Reader Code Repository: http://github.com/yob/pdf-reader
- PDF::Reader Rubyforge Page: http://rubyforge.org/projects/pdf-reader/
- PDF Specification: http://www.adobe.com/devnet/pdf/pdf_reference.html
- PDF Tutorial Slide Presentations: http://home.comcast.net/~jk05/presentations/PDFTutorials.html
